
cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:1
glaux2.0-sentence	1
perseus-grc2	 κατηγόρηται μέν , ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , Ἐπικράτους ἱκανὰ καὶ τῶν συμπρεσβευτῶν ·
perseus-eng2	 The accusations that have been made, men of Athens, against Epicrates and his fellow-envoys are sufficient:

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:1
glaux2.0-sentence	2
perseus-grc2	 ἐνθυμεῖσθαι δὲ χρὴ ὅτι πολλάκις ἠκούσατε τούτων λεγόντων , ὁπότε βούλοιντό τινα ἀδίκως ἀπολέσαι , ὅτι , εἰ μὴ καταψηφιεῖσθε ὧν αὐτοὶ κελεύουσιν , ἐπιλείψει ὑμᾶς ἡ μισθοφορά .
perseus-eng2	 but you should bear in mind the assertion that you have often heard from the mouths of these men, whenever they sought to ruin somebody unjustly, — that, unless you make the convictions that they demand, your stipends will not be forthcoming.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:2
glaux2.0-sentence	3
perseus-grc2	 καὶ νῦν οὐδὲν ἧττον ἐνδεῖ ·
perseus-eng2	 They are none the less deficient today;

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:2
glaux2.0-sentence	4
perseus-grc2	 ὥστε τὸ μὲν πάθος καὶ ἡ αἰσχύνη διὰ τούτων ὑμῖν γίγνεται , ἡ δ’ ὠφέλεια τούτοις ·
perseus-eng2	 so that through their act the suffering and the disgrace fall to you, and the profit to them.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:2
glaux2.0-sentence	5
perseus-grc2	 πεπείρανται γὰρ ὅτι , ὁπόταν οὗτοι καὶ οἱ τούτων λόγοι δοκῶσιν αἴτιοι εἶναι ψηφιεῖσθαι ὑμᾶς παρὰ τὸ δίκαιον , ῥᾳδίως παρὰ τῶν ἀδικούντων χρήματα λαμβάνουσι .
perseus-eng2	 For they have found by experiment that, whenever they and their speeches seem likely to induce you to give your votes against justice, they easily obtain money from the guilty parties.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:3
glaux2.0-sentence	6
perseus-grc2	 καίτοι τίνα χρὴ ἐλπίδα ἔχειν σωτηρίας , ὁπόταν ἐν χρήμασιν ᾖ καὶ σωθῆναι τῇ πόλει καὶ μή , ταῦτα δὲ οὗτοι , φύλακες ὑφ’ ὑμῶν καταστάντες , οἱ τῶν ἀδικούντων κολασταί , κλέπτωσί τε καὶ καταδωροδοκῶσι ;
perseus-eng2	 Yet what hope of safety can be ours, when the preservation or the ruin of the city depends on money, and when these men, — the guardians that you have set up, your chastisers of the guilty, — both rob you and do anything for bribes?

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:3
glaux2.0-sentence	7
perseus-grc2	 καὶ οὐ νῦν πρῶτον ὤφθησαν ἀδικοῦντες , ἀλλὰ καὶ πρότερον ἤδη δώρων ἐκρίθησαν .
perseus-eng2	 And this is not the first time that they have been caught in criminal acts: they have been tried before now for taking bribes.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:4
glaux2.0-sentence	8
perseus-grc2	 ὃ καὶ ὑμῖν ἔχω ἐπικαλέσαι ὅτι τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἀδικήματος Ὀνομάσαντος μὲν κατεψηφίσασθε , τούτου δὲ ἀπεψηφίσασθε , τοῦ αὐτοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἁπάντων κατηγοροῦντος καὶ τῶν αὐτῶν καταμαρτυρούντων , οἳ οὐχ ἑτέρων ἤκουσαν , ἀλλ’ αὐτοὶ ἦσαν οἱ περὶ τῶν χρημάτων καὶ τῶν δώρων πρὸς τούτους πράττοντες .
perseus-eng2	 And here I have to reproach you for having convicted Onomasas and acquitted this man of the same crime, although it was the same person who accused them all, and they were opposed by the same witnesses; who had not been told by others, but were the very persons who arranged with these men about the money and the gifts.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:5
glaux2.0-sentence	9
perseus-grc2	 καίτοι τοῦτο ἅπαντες ἐπίστασθε , ὅτι οὐχ ὅταν τοὺς μὴ δυναμένους λέγειν κολάζητε , τότε ἔσται παράδειγμα τοῦ μὴ ὑμᾶς ἀδικεῖν , ἀλλ’ ὁπόταν παρὰ τῶν δυναμένων δίκην λαμβάνητε , τότε πάντες παύσονται ἐπιχειροῦντες εἰς ὑμᾶς ἐξαμαρτάνειν .
perseus-eng2	 Yet you are all aware that it is not by chastising men who are not able to speak that you will make an example to deter men from wronging you, but that by doing justice upon those who are able you will cause everyone to cease attempting to commit offences against you.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:6
glaux2.0-sentence	10
perseus-grc2	 νῦν δ’ ἀσφαλῶς αὐτοῖς ἔχει τὰ ὑμέτερα κλέπτειν .
perseus-eng2	 But at present they find it quite safe to rob you.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:6
glaux2.0-sentence	11
perseus-grc2	 ἐὰν μὲν γὰρ λάθωσιν , ἀδεῶς αὐτοῖς ἕξουσι χρῆσθαι ·
perseus-eng2	 For if they are not detected, they will be able to enjoy their booty without fear;

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:6
glaux2.0-sentence	12
perseus-grc2	 ἐὰν δὲ ὀφθῶσιν , ἢ μέρει τῶν ἀδικημάτων τὸν κίνδυνον ἐξεπρίαντο , ἢ εἰς ἀγῶνα καταστάντες τῇ αὑτῶν δυνάμει ἐσώθησαν .
perseus-eng2	 while if they are caught, they either buy off the prosecution with part of their ill-gotten gains, or save themselves, on being brought to trial, by their own ability.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:6
glaux2.0-sentence	13
perseus-grc2	 νῦν τοίνυν , ὦ ἄνδρες δικασταί , παράδειγμα ποιήσατε τοῖς ἄλλοις δικαίοις εἶναι , παρὰ τούτων δίκην λαβόντες .
perseus-eng2	 So this is the moment, gentlemen of the jury, for you to make an example that will ensure the honesty of the rest, by doing justice upon these men.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:7
glaux2.0-sentence	14
perseus-grc2	 ἥκουσι δὲ πάντες οἱ τὰ τῆς πόλεως πράττοντες οὐχ ἡμῶν ἀκροασόμενοι , ἀλλ’ ὑμᾶς εἰσόμενοι ἥντινα γνώμην περὶ τῶν ἀδικούντων ἕξετε .
perseus-eng2	 All who are in the administration of the State have come here, not to listen to us, but to know what view you will take of the guilty.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:7
glaux2.0-sentence	15
perseus-grc2	 ὥστ’ εἰ μὲν ἀποψηφιεῖσθε τούτων , οὐδὲν δεινὸν δόξει αὐτοῖς εἶναι ὑμᾶς ἐξαπατήσαντας ἐκ τῶν ὑμετέρων ὠφελεῖσθαι ·
perseus-eng2	 Hence if you acquit these men, they will think that there is nothing to fear from deceiving you and making a profit at your expense;

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:7
glaux2.0-sentence	16
perseus-grc2	 ἐὰν δὲ καταψηφισάμενοι θανάτου τιμήσητε , τῇ αὐτῇ ψήφῳ τούς τε ἄλλους κοσμιωτέρους ποιήσετε ἢ νῦν εἰσι , καὶ παρὰ τούτων δίκην εἰληφότες ἔσεσθε .
perseus-eng2	 but if you condemn them, and sentence them to death, by that same vote you will make the rest more orderly than they are now, and you will have done justice upon these men.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:8
glaux2.0-sentence	17
perseus-grc2	 ἡγοῦμαι δ’ , ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι , οὐ -δ’ εἰ μὴ προθέντες αὐτοῖς κρίσιν , ἢ ἀπολογουμένων μὴ ἐθελήσαντες ἀκοῦσαι , καταψηφισάμενοι τῶν ἐσχάτων τιμήσαιτε , οὐκ ἂν ἀκρίτους αὐτοὺς ἀπολωλέναι , ἀλλὰ τὴν προσήκουσαν δίκην δεδωκέναι .
perseus-eng2	 And I conceive, men of Athens, that even if you decided, without putting them on trial or consenting to hear their defence, to condemn them to the extreme penalty, they would not have perished unjudged, but would have paid the suitable penalty.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:8
glaux2.0-sentence	18
perseus-grc2	 οὐ γὰρ οὗτοι ἄκριτοί εἰσι , περὶ ὧν ἂν ὑμεῖς εἰδότες τὰ πραχθέντα ψηφίσησθε , ἀλλ’ οἵτινες ἂν ὑπὸ τῶν ἐχθρῶν διαβληθέντες περὶ ὧν ὑμεῖς μὴ ἴστε , ἀκροάσεως μὴ τύχωσι .
perseus-eng2	 For those men are not unjudged on whom you have given your verdict with a knowledge of the acts that have been committed, but only those who, traduced by their enemies in matters of which you have no knowledge, fail to get a hearing.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:8
glaux2.0-sentence	19
perseus-grc2	 τούτων δὲ τὰ μὲν πράγματα κατηγορεῖ , ἡμεῖς δὲ καταμαρτυροῦμεν ·
perseus-eng2	 These men are accused by the facts: we are merely the witnesses against them.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:9
glaux2.0-sentence	20
perseus-grc2	 καὶ οὐ τοῦτο δέδοικα , ὡς ἐὰν ἀκροᾶσθε αὐτῶν ἀποψηφιεῖσθε ·
perseus-eng2	 I have no fear that, if you hear them, you will acquit them;

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:9
glaux2.0-sentence	21
perseus-grc2	 ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἂν ἡγοῦμαι αὐτοὺς δίκην ἀξίαν δεδωκέναι , εἰ ἀκροασάμενοι αὐτῶν καταψηφίσαισθε .
perseus-eng2	 but I consider that they would not have paid the penalty they deserved if you condemned them only after having heard them.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:9
glaux2.0-sentence	22
perseus-grc2	 πῶς γάρ , ὦ ἄνδρες δικασταί , οἷς οὐ -δὲ τα- ταὐτὰ καὶ ὑμῖν συμφέρει ;
perseus-eng2	 Could it be so, gentlemen, when they have not even the same interests as you?

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:9
glaux2.0-sentence	23
perseus-grc2	 οὗτοι μὲν γὰρ ἐν τῷ πολέμῳ ἐκ πενήτων πλούσιοι γεγόνασιν ἐκ τῶν ὑμετέρων , ὑμεῖς δὲ διὰ τούτους πένητες .
perseus-eng2	 During the war these men have advanced themselves from poverty to wealth at your expense, while you are in poverty because of them.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:10
glaux2.0-sentence	24
perseus-grc2	 καίτοι οὐ ταῦτα ἀγαθῶν δημαγωγῶν ἐστι , τὰ ὑμέτερα ἐν ταῖς ὑμετέραις συμφοραῖς λαμβάνειν , ἀλλὰ τὰ ἑαυτῶν ὑμῖν διδόναι .
perseus-eng2	 Yet surely it is the duty of true leaders of the people not to take your property in the stress of your misfortunes, but to give their own property to you.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:10
glaux2.0-sentence	25
perseus-grc2	 καὶ γάρ τοι εἰς τοσοῦτον ἥκομεν , ὥσθ’ οἳ πρότερον ἐν τῇ εἰρήνῃ οὐ -δὲ σφᾶς αὐτοὺς ἐδύναντο τρέφειν , νῦν ὑμῖν εἰσφορὰς εἰσφέρουσι καὶ χορηγοῦσι καὶ οἰκίας μεγάλας οἰκοῦσι .
perseus-eng2	 And here we have come to such a pass that those who formerly, in the period of peace, were unable even to support themselves, are now contributing to your special levies, producing dramas and dwelling in great houses.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:11
glaux2.0-sentence	26
perseus-grc2	 καίτοι ἑτέροις ὑμεῖς ἔστιν ὅτε τὰ πατρῷα κεκτημένοις ταῦτα ποιοῦσιν ἐφθονεῖτε ·
perseus-eng2	 Yet there was a time when you begrudged others the doing of these things with the means inherited from their fathers;

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:11
glaux2.0-sentence	27
perseus-grc2	 νῦν δ’ οὕτως ἡ πόλις διάκειται , ὥστε οὐκέτι ὧν οὗτοι κλέπτουσιν ὀργίζεσθε , ἀλλ’ ὧν αὐτοὶ λαμβάνετε χάριν ἴστε , ὥσπερ ὑμεῖς τὰ τούτων μισθοφοροῦντες , ἀλλ’ οὐ τούτων τὰ ὑμέτερα κλεπτόντων .
perseus-eng2	 whereas now the city is in such a plight that you are no longer incensed by the thefts of these people, but are thankful for what you can obtain for yourselves, as though it were you who were in their pay, and not they who were robbing you!

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:12
glaux2.0-sentence	28
perseus-grc2	 τὸ δὲ πάντων ὑπερφυέστατον , ὅτι ἐν μὲν τοῖς ἰδίοις οἱ ἀδικούμενοι δακρύουσι καὶ ἐλεινοί εἰσιν , ἐν δὲ τοῖς δημοσίοις οἱ μὲν ἀδικοῦντες ἐλεινοί , ὑμεῖς δ’ οἱ ἀδικούμενοι ἐλεεῖτε .
perseus-eng2	 Most preposterous of all, while in private suits it is the wronged who weep and arouse pity, in public suits it is the wrongdoers who arouse pity, and you, the wronged, who pity them.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:12
glaux2.0-sentence	29
perseus-grc2	 καὶ νῦν ἴσως ποιήσουσιν ἅπερ καὶ πρότερον ἦσαν εἰθισμένοι καὶ δημόται καὶ φίλοι , κλαίοντες ἐξαιτεῖσθαι αὐτοὺς παρ’ ὑμῶν .
perseus-eng2	 So now, perhaps, fellow-townsmen and friends, in their old habitual way, will cry out and implore you to spare them.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:13
glaux2.0-sentence	30
perseus-grc2	 ἐγὼ δ’ οὕτως ἀξιῶ γενέσθαι ·
perseus-eng2	 But, in my view, the proper course is this:

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:13
glaux2.0-sentence	31
perseus-grc2	 εἰ μὲν ἀδικεῖν τούτους μηδὲν νομίζουσιν , ἀποδείξαντας ὡς ψευδῆ τὰ κατηγορημένα , οὕτως πείθειν ὑμᾶς ἀποψηφίσασθαι ·
perseus-eng2	 if they believe these men to be free from guilt, let them prove that the accusations are false, and so persuade you to acquit them;

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:13
glaux2.0-sentence	32
perseus-grc2	 εἰ δὲ νομίσαντες ἀδικεῖν αἰτήσονται , δῆλον ὅτι τοῖς ἀδικοῦσιν εὐνούστεροί εἰσιν ἢ ὑμῖν τοῖς ἀδικουμένοις , ὥστ’ οὐ χάριτος ἄξιοι τυχεῖν ἀλλὰ τιμωρίας , ὁπόταν ὑμεῖς δύνησθε .
perseus-eng2	 but if they are going to beg them off in the belief that they are guilty, it is plain that they have more consideration for the wrongdoers than for you, the wronged; so that they do not deserve to get indulgence, but punishment, as soon as you can inflict it.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:14
glaux2.0-sentence	33
perseus-grc2	 ἔτι δὲ τοὺς αὐτοὺς ἡγεῖσθαι χρὴ καὶ τῶν κατηγόρων σφόδρα δεδεῆσθαι , νομίζοντας πολὺ ἂν θᾶττον παρ’ ἡμῶν ὀλίγων ὄντων ταύτην τὴν χάριν λαμβάνειν ἢ παρ’ ὑμῶν , ἔτι δὲ ῥᾷον ἄλλους τινὰς τὰ ὑμέτερα καταχαρίζεσθαι ἢ ὑμᾶς αὐτούς γε .
perseus-eng2	 Besides, you may take it that these same persons have plied the prosecution with urgent requests, supposing that they would obtain this indulgence more quickly from our small number than from you, and also that other hands would be readier than your own to make a present of your property.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:15
glaux2.0-sentence	34
perseus-grc2	 ἡμεῖς μὲν τοίνυν οὐκ ἠθελήσαμεν προδοῦναι , ἀξιοῦμεν δὲ μη -δ’ ὑμᾶς , ἐνθυμουμένους ὅτι σφόδρ’ ἂν ἡμῖν ὠργίζεσθε καὶ ἐτιμωρεῖσθε , ὅπου παρεπίπτομεν , ὡς εἰκὸς τοὺς ἀδικοῦντας , εἰ ἡμεῖς παρὰ τούτων ἢ χρήματα λαβόντες ἢ ἄλλῳ τινὶ τρόπῳ διηλλάγημεν .
perseus-eng2	 Now, we have refused to be traitors, and we expect no less of you: reflect that you would be highly incensed with us, and would punish us at any opportunity, as criminals deserve, had we come to terms with these men, either by taking payment or by any other means.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:15
glaux2.0-sentence	35
perseus-grc2	 καίτοι εἰ τοῖς μὴ δικαίως ἐπεξιοῦσιν ὀργίζεσθε , ἦ που σφόδρα χρὴ αὐτοὺς τοὺς ἀδικοῦντας τιμωρεῖσθαι .
perseus-eng2	 Yet if you are incensed with those who do not go through with their suit as justice requires, surely you are bound to punish the actual offenders.

cts:urn:tlg0540.tlg027:16
glaux2.0-sentence	36
perseus-grc2	 νῦν τοίνυν , ὦ ἄνδρες δικασταί , καταψηφισάμενοι Ἐπικράτους τῶν ἐσχάτων τιμήσατε , καὶ μή , ὥσπερ ἐν τῷ τέως χρόνῳ εἰθισμένοι ἐστέ , ἐπειδὰν καταψηφισάμενοι ἐξελέγξητε τοὺς ἀδικοῦντας , ἐν τῷ τιμήματι ἀζημίους ἀφίετε , ἔχθραν , οὐ δίκην παρὰ τῶν ἀδικούντων λαμβάνοντες , ὥσπερ τοῦ ὀνείδους ἀλλ’ οὐ τῆς ζημίας αὐτοῖς μέλον , εὖ εἰδότες ὅτι ἐν μὲν τῇ ψήφῳ οὐδὲν ἄλλο ποιεῖτε ἢ ὀνειδίζετε τοῖς ἀδικοῦσιν , ἐν δὲ τῷ τιμήματι τιμωρεῖσθε τοὺς ἐξαμαρτάνοντας .
perseus-eng2	 So now, gentlemen of the jury, after condemning Epicrates you must sentence him to the extreme penalty. Do not take the course, to which you have hitherto been accustomed, of convicting the guilty by an adverse verdict, and then letting them go unscathed when you come to the sentence: this procures you the enmity, not the punishment, of the guilty, as though it were the disgrace, and not the penalty, that gave them concern. For you are well aware that by your verdict you merely disgrace the guilty, but that by your sentence you exact vengeance for the crimes that they commit.
